
                                                                           PARLEMENT EUROPEEN

        +----------------------------------------------------------+
        | 2004 |  Your browser may not support display of   | 2009 |
        |      |                this image.                 |      |
        +----------------------------------------------------------+

                                                  Commission du marche interieur et de la protection des consommateurs

                                                                                                                                                        2007/0248(COD)

   16.3.2009

        AMENDEMENTS

        104 - 152

        Projet de recommandation pour la deuxieme lecture

        Malcolm Harbour

        (PE421.119v02-00)

        on the Council common position for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2002/22/EC on universal service and
        users' rights relating to electronic communications networks, Directive 2002/58/EC concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in
        the electronic communications sector and Regulation (EC) No 2006/2004 on cooperation between national authorities responsible for the enforcement of consumer
        protection laws

        Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

        (16497/1/2008 - C6-0068/2009 and C6-0420/2007 - 2007/0248(COD))

    

   AM_Com_LegRecomm

    

   Amendement 104

   Evelyne Gebhardt

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Recital 3 a (new)

                                                          
                                      Position commune du Amendement                                                                
                                      Conseil             
                                                          (3a) Der Universaldienst ist ein Netz zum Schutz von Personen, deren      
                                                          finanzielle Ressourcen, geografischer Standort oder besondere soziale     
                                                          Bedu:rfnisse ihnen keinen Zugang zu den fu:r die grosse Mehrheit der      
                                                          Bu:rger verfu:gbaren Basisdiensten gestatten. Die in der Richtlinie       
                                                          2002/22/EG verankerte grundlegende Anforderung an den Universaldienst     
                                                          besteht darin, den Nutzern auf Antrag einen Anschluss an das o:ffentliche 
                                                          Telefonnetz an einem festen Standort zu einem erschwinglichen Preis       
                                                          bereitzustellen. Sie erstreckt sich somit weder auf Mobilfunkdienste noch 
                                                          auf den Breitbandzugang zum Internet. Dieser grundlegenden Anforderung    
                                                          stehen nun die Entwicklungen im Bereich der Technologie und des Marktes   
                                                          gegenu:ber, in deren Rahmen die mobile Kommunikation in vielen Bereichen  
                                                          die prima:re Form des Zugangs bilden kann und die Netze sich in           
                                                          zunehmendem Masse der Technologie fu:r die Mobil- und                     
                                                          Breitbandkommunikation bedienen. Angesichts dieser Entwicklungen muss     
                                                          bewertet werden, ob die technischen, sozialen und wirtschaftlichen        
                                                          Bedingungen erfu:llt sind, um die mobile Kommunikation und den            
                                                          Breitbandzugang in die Universaldienstverpflichtung einzubeziehen, wobei  
                                                          auch die damit verbundenen Aspekte der Finanzierung zu beru:cksichtigen   
                                                          sind. Zu diesem Zweck wird die Kommission spa:testens im Herbst 2009 eine 
                                                          U:berpru:fung des Umfangs der Universaldienstverpflichtung und            
                                                          Vorschla:ge fu:r eine Reform der Richtlinie 2002/22EG zur Erreichung der  
                                                          entsprechenden im o:ffentlichen Interesse liegenden Ziele vorlegen. Diese 
                                                          U:berpru:fung beru:cksichtigt die wirtschaftliche Wettbewerbsfa:higkeit   
                                                          und schliesst eine Analyse der gesellschaftlichen, wirtschaftlichen und   
                                                          technischen Entwicklung sowie des Risikos der sozialen Ausgrenzung ein.   
                                                          Sie geht auch auf die technische Durchfu:hrbarkeit und die                
                                                          Wirtschaftlichkeit, die voraussichtlichen Kosten, ihre Verteilung und     
                                                          Finanzierungsmodelle einer neu festgelegten Universaldienstverpflichtung  
                                                          ein. Da Fragen im Zusammenhang mit dem Umfang der                         
                                                          Universaldienstverpflichtung daher umfassend in diesem gesonderten        
                                                          Verfahren behandelt werden, beschra:nkt sich diese Richtlinie auf die     
                                                          anderen Aspekte der Richtlinie 2002/22/EG.                                

                                                                                                                                                                Or. de

                                                                              Justification

   Der A:nderungsantrag entspricht der Parlamentsposition aus erster Lesung.

   Amendement  105

   Syed Kamall

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Recital 22

                                                                                            
                                      Position commune du Conseil                           Amendement                              
                                      (22) Given the increasing importance of electronic    (22) Given the increasing importance of 
                                      communications for consumers and businesses, users    electronic communications for consumers 
                                      should be fully informed of the traffic management    and businesses, users should be fully   
                                      policies of the service and/or network provider with  informed of any relevant limitations    
                                      which they conclude the contract. Where there is a    imposed on the use of electronic        
                                      lack of effective competition, national regulatory    communications services by the service  
                                      authorities should use the remedies available to them and/or network provider with which they 
                                      under Directive 2002/19/EC (Access Directive) to      conclude the contract.                  
                                      ensure that users' access to particular types of      
                                      content or application is not unreasonably            
                                      restricted.                                           

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

                                                                              Justification

   This proposal, combining EP and Council wording, focuses on the aspect of transparency, ensuring transparency is targeted at the relevant restrictions which are
   the important parameter for the end-user rather than abstract and broad "network management policies". It also no longer mentions the access Directive whereas the
   current Recital 14 of Council text and 14a of EP text risks creating confusion over the fact that intervention under Directive 2002/19/EC only address network
   access for electronic communications operators. SMP-remedies do not directly address access to and for content and applications by end-users.

   Amendement  106

   Eva-Britt Svensson

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Recital 22

                                                                           
                                      Position commune du Conseil          Amendement                                               
                                      (22) Given the increasing importance (22) End-users should decide what content they require   
                                      of electronic communications for     to be able to send and receive, and which services,      
                                      consumers and businesses, users      applications, hardware and software they require to use  
                                      should be fully informed of the      for such purposes, without prejudice to the need to      
                                      traffic management policies of the   preserve the integrity and security of networks and      
                                      service and/or network provider with services. A competitive market with transparent          
                                      which they conclude the contract.    offerings as provided for in Directive 2002/22/EC should 
                                      Where there is a lack of effective   ensure that end-users are able to access and distribute  
                                      competition, national regulatory     any content and to use any applications and/or services  
                                      authorities should use the remedies  of their choice, as stated in Article 8 of Directive     
                                      available to them under Directive    2002/21/EC. Given the increasing importance of           
                                      2002/19/EC (Access Directive) to     electronic communications for consumers and businesses,  
                                      ensure that users' access to         users should in any case be fully informed of the        
                                      particular types of content or       traffic management policies of the service and/or        
                                      application is not unreasonably      network provider with which they conclude the contract.  
                                      restricted.                          Disclosure should be such that consumers are able to     
                                                                           make an informed decision, and enable them to choose to  
                                                                           adjust their behaviour or to switch networks. The        
                                                                           information on traffic management policies should        
                                                                           include the criteria and rules implemented by the        
                                                                           operator for managing traffic, including the thresholds  
                                                                           that will trigger changes in the users' experience of    
                                                                           the services. It shall, where necessary, disclose        
                                                                           specific actions included in the traffic management      
                                                                           policy. Depending on the technology used, this may       
                                                                           require user consent under Directive 2002/58/EC.         

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

                                                                              Justification

   Telecommunications framework law concerns the regulation of network operators and providers of electronic communications services, and not the regulation of user
   behaviour. This directive concerns the rights of users and citizens in respect of the purchase of services from such operators. The language concerning
   `limitations' placed the focus on the user behaviour. This amendment puts the onus back onto the operator behaviour, and tasks the regulators with ensuring the
   accountability of the operators, as well as allowing operators the necessary flexibility to address congestion.

   Amendement  107

   Bernadette Vergnaud, Cristian Silviu Busoi, Heide Ru:hle

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Recital 22

                                                                             
                                      Position commune du Conseil            Amendement                                             
                                      (22) Given the increasing importance   (22) End-users should decide what content they want to 
                                      of electronic communications for       be able to send and receive, and which services,       
                                      consumers and businesses, users should applications, hardware and software they want to use   
                                      be fully informed of the traffic       for such purposes, without prejudice to the need to    
                                      management policies of the service     preserve the integrity and security of networks and    
                                      and/or network provider with which     services. A competitive market with transparent        
                                      they conclude the contract. Where      offerings as provided for in Directive 2002/22/EC      
                                      there is a lack of effective           should ensure that end-users are able to access and    
                                      competition, national regulatory       distribute any content and to use any applications     
                                      authorities should use the remedies    and/or services of their choice, as stated in Article  
                                      available to them under Directive      8 of Directive 2002/21/EC. Given the increasing        
                                      2002/19/EC (Access Directive) to       importance of electronic communications for consumers  
                                      ensure that users' access to           and businesses, users should be fully informed of the  
                                      particular types of content or         traffic management policies of, and subsequent         
                                      application is not unreasonably        possible limitations of access to applications or      
                                      restricted.                            services imposed by, the service and/or network        
                                                                             provider with which they conclude the contract. Where  
                                                                             there is a lack of effective competition, national     
                                                                             regulatory authorities should use the remedies         
                                                                             available to them under Directive 2002/19/EC (Access   
                                                                             Directive) to ensure that users' access to particular  
                                                                             types of content or application is not unreasonably    
                                                                             restricted.                                            

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  108

   Malcolm Harbour

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Recital 22 a (new)

                                                                  
                                      Position commune du Conseil Amendement                                                        
                                                                  (22a) Traffic management policies should be defined for the       
                                                                  purposes of disclosure under this Directive. The practices        
                                                                  embodied in them are fully subject to competition scrutiny.       

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  109

   Eva-Britt Svensson

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Recital 22 a (new)

                                                          
                                      Position commune du Amendement                                                                
                                      Conseil             
                                                          (22a) Traffic management policies are the rules and guidelines which a    
                                                          network operator has put in place to handle the flow of traffic on the    
                                                          network (i.e. bandwidth management), but they may additionally utilise    
                                                          capabilities installed by the operator to prioritise, block and filter    
                                                          traffic according to pre-set criteria. These policies must be able to be  
                                                          justified by a valid technical reasons such as temporary short-term       
                                                          remedies put in place so as to smooth traffic in cases of acute network   
                                                          congestion or in response to malicious activity threatening network       
                                                          security or end-user security. Traffic management policies should be      
                                                          neutral in respect of content and applications and must not result in the 
                                                          user not being able to access content, services and applications.         
                                                          Operators should in all cases respect fundamental rights and freedoms of  
                                                          users.                                                                    

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

                                                                              Justification

   Traffic management systems are being deployed by telecommunications network operators and Internet service providers. They represent the first phase of the
   next-generation network, and bring in a range of new functionality, including filtering of content and applications, and the delivery of  content on a preferential
   or discriminatory basis, which has implications for the way services may be delivered and for users. Next generation networks were originally outside the scope of
   the telecoms review, however, the references to traffic management policies in this directive and in the Framework directive, and the requirement to improve the
   transparency for users, especially users of the Internet, introduce them into the framework. In this context, "traffic management policies" requires a formal
   definition (RoP 62 b) and c) apply).

   Amendement  110

   Jacques Toubon

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Recital 22 bis (nouveau)

                                                          
                                      Position commune du Amendement                                                                
                                      Conseil             
                                                          (22 bis) La directive 2002/22/CE n'exige pas des fournisseurs qu'ils      
                                                          controlent les informations transmises par l'intermediaire de leurs       
                                                          reseaux, ni qu'ils engagent des poursuites judiciaires `a l'encontre de   
                                                          leurs clients en raison d'informations transmises, et ne rend pas les     
                                                          fournisseurs responsables de ces informations. Il appartient aux          
                                                          autorites competentes d'engager des poursuites penales.                   

                                                                                                                                                                Or. fr

                                                                              Justification

   Il apparait esentiel de laisser la possibilite de mettre en place des mesures preventives autres que penales, telles qu'elles sont envisagees au Royaume-Uni.

   Amendement  111

   Eva-Britt Svensson

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Recital 22 b (new)

                                                          
                                      Position commune du Amendement                                                                
                                      Conseil             
                                                          (22b) Internet users are entitled to an Internet connection to send and   
                                                          receive content of their own choice, use services and applications of     
                                                          their own choice, and connect hardware and use software of their own      
                                                          choice that does not harm the network. Internet users are entitled to a   
                                                          connection free from discrimination based on type of application, service 
                                                          or content, or based on sender or receiver address.                       

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

                                                                              Justification

   Self explanatory. RoP 62 b) and c) apply.

   Amendement  112

   Malcolm Harbour

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Recital 24

                                                                                      
                                      Position commune du Conseil                     Amendement                                    
                                      (24) The availability of transparent,           (24) The availability of transparent,         
                                      up-to-date and comparable information on offers up-to-date and comparable information on      
                                      and services is a key element for consumers in  offers and services is a key element for      
                                      competitive markets where several providers     consumers in competitive markets where        
                                      offer services. End-users and consumers of      several providers offer services. End-users   
                                      electronic communications services should be    and consumers of electronic communications    
                                      able to easily compare the prices of various    services should be able to easily compare the 
                                      services offered on the market based on         prices of various services offered on the     
                                      information published in an easily accessible   market based on information published in an   
                                      form. In order to allow them to make price      easily accessible form. In order to allow     
                                      comparisons easily, national regulatory         them to make price comparisons easily,        
                                      authorities should be able to require from      national regulatory authorities should be     
                                      undertakings providing electronic               able to require from undertakings providing   
                                      communications networks and/or services greater electronic communications networks and/or     
                                      transparency as regards information (including  services greater transparency as regards      
                                      tariffs, consumption patterns and other         information (including tariffs, consumption   
                                      relevant statistics) and to ensure that third   patterns and other relevant statistics) and   
                                      parties have the right to use, without charge,  to ensure that third parties have the right   
                                      publicly available information published by     to use, without charge, publicly available    
                                      such undertakings. National regulatory          information published by such undertakings.   
                                      authorities should also be able to make price   National regulatory authorities should also   
                                      guides available, in particular where the       be able to make price guides available, in    
                                      market has not provided them free of charge or  particular where the market has not provided  
                                      at a reasonable price. Undertakings should not  them free of charge or at a reasonable price. 
                                      be entitled to any remuneration for the use of  Undertakings should not be entitled to any    
                                      information where it has already been published remuneration for the use of information where 
                                      and thus belongs in the public domain. In       it has already been published and thus        
                                      addition, end-users and consumers should be     belongs in the public domain. In addition,    
                                      adequately informed of the price and the type   end-users and consumers should be adequately  
                                      of service offered before they purchase a       informed of the price and the type of service 
                                      service, in particular if a freephone number is offered before they purchase a service, in    
                                      subject to additional charges. National         particular if a freephone number is subject   
                                      regulatory authorities should be able to        to additional charges. National regulatory    
                                      require that such information is provided       authorities should be able to require that    
                                      generally, and, for certain categories of       such information is provided generally, and,  
                                      services determined by them, immediately prior  for certain categories of services determined 
                                      to connecting the call, unless otherwise        by them, immediately prior to connecting the  
                                      provided for by national law. When determining  call, unless otherwise provided for by        
                                      the categories of call requiring pricing        national law. When determining the categories 
                                      information prior to connection, national       of call requiring pricing information prior   
                                      regulatory authorities should take due account  to connection, national regulatory            
                                      of the nature of the service, the pricing       authorities should take due account of the    
                                      conditions which apply to it and whether it is  nature of the service, the pricing conditions 
                                      offered by a provider who is not a provider of  which apply to it and whether it is offered   
                                      electronic communications services. Without     by a provider who is not a provider of        
                                      prejudice to Directive 2000/31/EC (Directive on electronic communications services. Without   
                                      electronic commerce), undertakings should also, prejudice to Directive 2000/31/EC (Directive  
                                      if required by Member States, provide           on electronic commerce), undertakings should  
                                      subscribers with public interest information    also, if required by Member States, provide   
                                      produced by the relevant public authorities     subscribers with public interest information  
                                      regarding, inter alia, the most common          produced by the relevant public authorities   
                                      infringements and their legal consequences.     regarding, inter alia, the most common        
                                                                                      infringements and their legal consequences.   
                                                                                      Dissemination of such information should      
                                                                                      however not create an excessive burden on     
                                                                                      undertakings and should therefore be subject  
                                                                                      to agreement on reimbursement of significant  
                                                                                      additional costs by the public authorities in 
                                                                                      the event that those authorities require      
                                                                                      recourse to means of communications other     
                                                                                      than those used by the undertakings in their  
                                                                                      ordinary course of business for their         
                                                                                      communications with subscribers.              

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  113

   Eva-Britt Svensson

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Recital 24

                                                                                       
                                      Position commune du Conseil                      Amendement                                   
                                      (24) The availability of transparent, up-to-date (24) The availability of transparent,        
                                      and comparable information on offers and         up-to-date and comparable information on     
                                      services is a key element for consumers in       offers and services is a key element for     
                                      competitive markets where several providers      consumers in competitive markets where       
                                      offer services. End-users and consumers of       several providers offer services. End-users  
                                      electronic communications services should be     and consumers of electronic communications   
                                      able to easily compare the prices of various     services should be able to easily compare    
                                      services offered on the market based on          the prices of various services and their     
                                      information published in an easily accessible    traffic management policies offered on the   
                                      form. In order to allow them to make price       market based on information published in an  
                                      comparisons easily, national regulatory          easily accessible form. In order to allow    
                                      authorities should be able to require from       them to make price comparisons easily,       
                                      undertakings providing electronic communications national regulatory authorities should be    
                                      networks and/or services greater transparency as able to require from undertakings providing  
                                      regards information (including tariffs,          electronic communications networks and/or    
                                      consumption patterns and other relevant          services greater transparency as regards     
                                      statistics) and to ensure that third parties     information (including tariffs, consumption  
                                      have the right to use, without charge, publicly  patterns, and other relevant statistics) and 
                                      available information published by such          to ensure that third parties have the right  
                                      undertakings. National regulatory authorities    to use publicly available information        
                                      should also be able to make price guides         published by such undertakings, without      
                                      available, in particular where the market has    charge. National regulatory authorities      
                                      not provided them free of charge or at a         should also be able to make price guides     
                                      reasonable price. Undertakings should not be     available, in particular where the market    
                                      entitled to any remuneration for the use of      has not provided them free of charge or at a 
                                      information where it has already been published  reasonable price. Undertakings should not be 
                                      and thus belongs in the public domain. In        entitled to any remuneration for the use of  
                                      addition, end-users and consumers should be      information where it has already been        
                                      adequately informed of the price and the type of published and thus belongs in the public     
                                      service offered before they purchase a service,  domain. In addition, end-users and consumers 
                                      in particular if a freephone number is subject   should be adequately informed of the price   
                                      to additional charges. National regulatory       and the type of service offered before they  
                                      authorities should be able to require that such  purchase a service, in particular if a       
                                      information is provided generally, and, for      freephone number is subject to additional    
                                      certain categories of services determined by     charges. National regulatory authorities     
                                      them, immediately prior to connecting the call,  should be able to require that such          
                                      unless otherwise provided for by national law.   information is provided generally, and, for  
                                      When determining the categories of call          certain categories of services determined by 
                                      requiring pricing information prior to           them, immediately prior to connecting the    
                                      connection, national regulatory authorities      call, unless it is otherwise provided for by 
                                      should take due account of the nature of the     national law. When determining the           
                                      service, the pricing conditions which apply to   categories of call requiring pricing         
                                      it and whether it is offered by a provider who   information prior to connection, national    
                                      is not a provider of electronic communications   regulatory authorities should take due       
                                      services. Without prejudice to                   account of the nature of the service, the    
                                      Directive 2000/31/EC (Directive on electronic    pricing conditions which apply to it and     
                                      commerce), undertakings should also, if required whether it is offered by a provider who is   
                                      by Member States, provide subscribers with       not a provider of electronic communications  
                                      public interest information produced by the      services. Without prejudice to Directive     
                                      relevant public authorities regarding,           2000/31/EC (Directive on electronic          
                                      inter alia, the most common infringements and    commerce), undertakings should also, if      
                                      their legal consequences.                        required by Member States, provide to        
                                                                                       subscribers with public interest information 
                                                                                       produced by the relevant public authorities  
                                                                                       regarding, inter alia, the most common       
                                                                                       infringements and their legal consequences.  
                                                                                       Significant additional costs incurred by     
                                                                                       undertakings for dissemination of such       
                                                                                       information should be agreed between the     
                                                                                       undertakings and the relevant authorities    
                                                                                       and met by those authorities.                

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  114

   Eva-Britt Svensson

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Recital 24 a (new)

                                                          
                                      Position commune du Amendement                                                                
                                      Conseil             
                                                          (24a) Transparency measures are most effective where disclosure is made   
                                                          both to users and to regulatory authorities, including the National       
                                                          Regulatory Authorities and where necessary, to the BERT/GERT. Member      
                                                          States should ensure therefore that National Regulatory Authorities, the  
                                                          Commission and BERT/GERT may require disclosure of traffic management     
                                                          policies and take appropriate measures in cases where operators fail to   
                                                          disclose their traffic management policies or where the traffic           
                                                          management  policy does not respect the rights of users to access the     
                                                          content, applications and services of their choice. Disclosure to         
                                                          regulators should  include the traffic management equipment installed by  
                                                          the operator, when it was first commissioned, where in the network it is  
                                                          deployed, how it is configured, when and under what circumstances it is   
                                                          used, and the criteria for restrictions or limitations on usage by        
                                                          end-users including the thresholds that will trigger limits on users'     
                                                          access. It should, where necessary, disclose specific actions included in 
                                                          the traffic management policy.                                            

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

                                                                              Justification

   The Electronic Communications Framework requires safeguards to be in place to ensure that users can freely access and use the content, services and applications of
   their choice, at the same time as allowing operators the necessary flexibility to address congestion during peak periods through network management practices that
   are non-discriminatory. Regulators should be able to look at whether traffic management policies are intended to support a commercial interest, in order to assess
   whether abusive behaviour is taking place and take appropriate action (RoP 62 b) and c) apply).

   Amendement  115

   Eva-Britt Svensson

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Recital 26

                                                                          
                                      Position commune du Conseil         Amendement                                                
                                      (26) A competitive market should    (26) A competitive market should ensure that users enjoy  
                                      ensure that users enjoy the quality the quality of service they require, but in particular    
                                      of service they require, but in     cases it may be necessary to ensure that public           
                                      particular cases it may be          communications networks attain minimum quality levels so  
                                      necessary to ensure that public     as to prevent degradation of service, the blocking of     
                                      communications networks attain      access and the slowing of traffic over networks.          
                                      minimum quality levels so as to     Prioritisation or limitation of traffic must be able to   
                                      prevent degradation of service, the be justified by a valid technical reason, such as         
                                      blocking of access and the slowing  temporary short-term remedies put in place so as to       
                                      of traffic over networks.           smooth traffic in cases of acute network congestion or in 
                                                                          response to malicious activity threatening network        
                                                                          security or end-user security, and must not result in the 
                                                                          user not being able to access content, services and       
                                                                          applications. A minimum quality of service should ensure  
                                                                          that users are able to access all content, services and   
                                                                          applications of their choice without being hindered,      
                                                                          limited or blocked by the traffic management policies of  
                                                                          the network operator. Since inconsistent remedies will    
                                                                          significantly impair the achievement of the internal      
                                                                          market, the Commission should assess any requirements set 
                                                                          by national regulatory authorities for possible           
                                                                          regulatory intervention across the Community and, if      
                                                                          necessary, adopt technical implementing measures in order 
                                                                          to achieve consistent application throughout the          
                                                                          Community.                                                

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

                                                                              Justification

   Traffic management systems bring in a range of new functionality for telecoms and Internet networks, including content filtering and preferential or discriminatory
   delivery of content. Regulators should be able to act using more than one regulatory tool, especially to protect the interests of citizens.

   Amendement  116

   Jacques Toubon

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Recital 26

                                                                                   
                                      Position commune du Conseil                  Amendement                                       
                                      (26) A competitive market should ensure that (26) A competitive market should also ensure     
                                      users enjoy the quality of service they      that users are able to have the quality of       
                                      require, but in particular cases it may be   service they require, but in particular cases it 
                                      necessary to ensure that public              may be necessary to ensure that public           
                                      communications networks attain minimum       communications networks attain minimum quality   
                                      quality levels so as to prevent degradation  levels  so as to address unjustified degradation 
                                      of service, the blocking of access and the   of service, usage limitations and slowing of     
                                      slowing of traffic over networks.            traffic.                                         

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

                                                                              Justification

   The current EU legal framework and the new rules on transparency proposed in this Directive in principle already provide for sufficient safeguards to ensure the
   ability of end-users to access content and applications of their choice. In particular, a competitive market for retail broadband access - where necessary ensured
   by wholesale ex-ante access obligations under Directive 2002/19/EC - and transparency requirements regarding restrictions of quality of service under this
   Directive will penalise any undue restrictions of users' ability to access the content of their choice. If NRAs are nevertheless given the power to intervene in
   quality of services, it should be clarified that this can be done only to address observed harmful practices that are not justified by legitimate interests of
   network management.

   Amendement  117

   Erika Mann, Edit Herczog

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Recital 26 a (new)

                                                          
                                      Position commune du Amendement                                                                
                                      Conseil             
                                                          (26a) Directive 2002/22/EC is without prejudice to reasonable network     
                                                          management by providers, for example to address congestion and capacity   
                                                          constraints, to ensure the security of the network and of users and to    
                                                          enable reliable performance of individual services. These practices       
                                                          should not hinder the competitive development of the information society  
                                                          and should respect the requirements set out in articles 20 and 21 of      
                                                          Directive 2002/22/EC.                                                     

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

                                                                              Justification

   To provide more legal certainty, appropriate and future-proof guidance on the provisions of Directive 2002/22 regarding quality of service requirements and network
   management should be put in place. The Recital underlines that network management should not distort competition and that operators have to comply with the newly
   introduced requirements regarding transparency towards end-users on any restrictions of access to services and applications. At the same time, the framework should
   not restrict network management per se - any exhaustive list of what network management can achieve will be incomplete and thereby limit future innovation. A key
   objective of network management will be to ensure quality of service for new services (e.g. distant health applications).

   Amendement  118

   Zita Plestinska, Andreas Schwab

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Recital 26 a (new)

                                                          
                                      Position commune du Amendement                                                                
                                      Conseil             
                                                          (26a) Directive 2002/22/EC is without prejudice to reasonable network     
                                                          management by providers for example to address congestion, capacity       
                                                          constraints, to ensure the security of the network and of the users and   
                                                          to enable reliable performance of individual services, as long as this    
                                                          does not hinder the competitive development of the information society.   
                                                          Due account should be taken of the right of network and service operators 
                                                          to diversify their offers to consumers in a competitive environment,      
                                                          while respecting the requirements set out in articles 20  and 21 of       
                                                          Directive 2002/22/EC.                                                     

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

                                                                              Justification

   To provide more legal certainty, appropriate and future-proof guidance on the provisions of Directive 2002/22 regarding quality of service requirements and network
   management should be put in place. The Recital underlines that network management should not distort competition and that operators have to comply with the newly
   introduced requirements regarding transparency towards end-users on any restrictions of access to services and applications. At the same time, the framework should
   not restrict network management per se - any exhaustive list of what network management can achieve will be incomplete and thereby limit future innovation.

   Amendement  119

   Bernadette Vergnaud

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Recital 30

                                                                                     
                                      Position commune du Conseil                    Amendement                                     
                                      (30) Directory enquiry services should be, and (30) Directory enquiry services should be, and 
                                      frequently are, provided under competitive     frequently are, provided in competition,       
                                      market conditions, pursuant to Article 5 of    pursuant to Article 5 of Commission Directive  
                                      Commission Directive 2002/77/EC of             2002/77/EC of 16 September 2002 on competition 
                                      16 September 2002 on competition in the        in the markets for electronic communications   
                                      markets for electronic communications networks networks and services. Wholesale measures      
                                      and services. Measures concerning the          ensuring the inclusion of end-user data (both  
                                      inclusion of end-user data (held by            fixed and mobile) in databases should comply   
                                      undertakings that assign telephone numbers to  with the safeguards for the protection of      
                                      subscribers) in databases should comply with   personal data, including Article 12 of         
                                      the safeguards for the protection of personal  Directive 2002/58/EC. The cost-oriented supply 
                                      data, including Article 12 of                  of that data to service providers, with the    
                                      Directive 2002/58/EC (Directive on privacy and possibility for Member States to establish a   
                                      electronic communications). The cost-oriented  centralised mechanism for providing            
                                      supply of that data for the purposes of        comprehensive aggregated information to        
                                      publicly available directory and directory     directory providers, and the provision of      
                                      enquiry services should be in place in order   network access in reasonable and transparent   
                                      to ensure that end-users benefit fully from    conditions, should be in place in order to     
                                      reasonable and transparent competitive         ensure that end users benefit fully from       
                                      conditions.                                    competition, with the ultimate aim of enabling 
                                                                                     the removal of retail regulation from these    
                                                                                     services and the provision of offers of        
                                                                                     directory services under reasonable and        
                                                                                     transparent conditions.                        

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  120

   Bernadette Vergnaud, Cristian Silviu Busoi, Heide Ru:hle

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Recital 32

                                                                                     
                                      Position commune du Conseil                    Amendement                                     
                                      (32) Member States should ensure that          (32) Member States should ensure that          
                                      undertakings providing end-users with an       undertakings providing end users with an       
                                      electronic communications service designed for electronic communications service for          
                                      originating calls through a number or numbers  originating calls through a number or numbers  
                                      in a national telephone numbering plan provide in a national telephone numbering plan provide 
                                      access to emergency services with such         reliable and accurate access to emergency      
                                      accuracy and reliability as is technically     services, taking into account possible lack of 
                                      feasible for that electronic communications    access in areas not covered by mobile          
                                      service. Network-independent service providers networks. Network-independent undertakings may 
                                      may not have control over networks and may not not have control over networks and may not be  
                                      be able to ensure that emergency calls made    able to ensure that the emergency calls made   
                                      through their service are routed with the same through their service are routed with the same 
                                      reliability as traditional integrated          reliability as traditional integrated          
                                      telephone service providers, as they may not   telephone service providers, as they may not   
                                      be able to guarantee service availability,     be able to guarantee service availability,     
                                      given that problems related to infrastructure  given that problems related to the             
                                      are not under their control. Once              infrastructure are not under the direct        
                                      internationally-recognised standards ensuring  control of these undertakings.  Once           
                                      accurate and reliable routing and connection   internationally-recognized standards ensuring  
                                      to the emergency services are in place,        accurate, reliable routing and connection to   
                                      network-independent service providers should   the emergency services are in place, all       
                                      also fulfil the obligations related to access  network-independent service providers should   
                                      to emergency services at a level comparable to also fulfil the obligations related to access  
                                      that required of other undertakings.           to emergency services at a level comparable to 
                                                                                     that required of other undertakings.           

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  121

   Bernadette Vergnaud, Heide Ru:hle

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Recital 38

                                                                                  
                                      Position commune du Conseil                 Amendement                                        
                                      (38) Legal "must-carry" obligations may be  (38) Legal "must-carry" obligations may be        
                                      applied to specified radio and television   applied to specified radio and audiovisual media  
                                      broadcast channels and complementary        services and complementary services supplied by a 
                                      services supplied by a specified media      specified media service provider. Audiovisual     
                                      service provider. Member States should      media services are defined in Directive           
                                      provide a clear justification for the "must 2007/65/EC of the European Parliament and of the  
                                      carry" obligations in their national law so Council of 11 December 2007 amending Council      
                                      as to ensure that such obligations are      Directive 89/552/EEC on the coordination of       
                                      transparent, proportionate and properly     certain provisions laid down by law, regulation   
                                      defined. In that regard, "must carry" rules or administrative action in Member States         
                                      should be designed in a way which provides  concerning the pursuit of television broadcasting 
                                      sufficient incentives for efficient         activities. Member States should provide a clear  
                                      investment in infrastructure. "Must carry"  justification for the "must carry" obligations so 
                                      rules should be periodically reviewed in    as to ensure that such obligations are            
                                      order to keep them up-to-date with          transparent, proportionate and properly defined.  
                                      technological and market evolution and in   In that regard, "must carry" rules should be      
                                      order to ensure that they continue to be    designed in a way which provides sufficient       
                                      proportionate to the objectives to be       incentives for efficient investment in            
                                      achieved. Complementary services include,   infrastructure.  "Must carry" rules should be     
                                      but are not limited to, services designed   periodically reviewed in order to keep them       
                                      to improve accessibility for end-users with up-to-date with technological and market          
                                      disabilities, such as videotext,            evolution in order to ensure that they continue   
                                      subtitling, audio description and sign      to be proportionate to the objectives to be       
                                      language.                                   achieved.  Complementary services include, but    
                                                                                  are not limited to, services designed to improve  
                                                                                  accessibility for end-users with disabilities,    
                                                                                  such as videotext, subtitling, audio description  
                                                                                  and sign language.                                

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  122

   Bernadette Vergnaud, Cristian Silviu Busoi, Heide Ru:hle

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 1

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 1 - paragraph 1

                                                                                   
                                      Position commune du Conseil                  Amendement                                       
                                      1. Within the framework of Directive         1. Within the framework of Directive 2002/21/EC  
                                      2002/21/EC (Framework Directive), this       (Framework Directive), this Directive concerns   
                                      Directive concerns the provision of          the provision of electronic communications       
                                      electronic communications networks and       networks and services to end-users. The aim is   
                                      services to end-users. The aim is to ensure  to ensure the availability throughout the        
                                      the availability throughout the Community of Community of good quality publicly available     
                                      good-quality publicly available services     services through effective competition and       
                                      through effective competition and choice and choice and to deal with circumstances in which   
                                      to deal with circumstances in which the      the needs of end users are not satisfactorily    
                                      needs of end-users are not satisfactorily    met by the market. This Directive also includes  
                                      met by the market. The Directive also        provisions concerning consumer premises terminal 
                                      includes provisions concerning certain       equipment, with particular attention being given 
                                      aspects of terminal equipment intended to    to terminal equipment for users with special     
                                      facilitate access for disabled end-users.    needs, including the disabled and the elderly.   

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  123

   Bernadette Vergnaud, Heide Ru:hle

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 2 - point (b)

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 2 - point (c)

                                                                                 
                                      Position commune du Conseil                Amendement                                         
                                      (c) "publicly available telephone service" (c) "publicly available telephone service" means a 
                                      means a service made available to the      service available to the public for originating    
                                      public for originating and receiving,      and/or receiving, directly or indirectly, national 
                                      directly or indirectly, national or        and/or international calls and other means of      
                                      national and international calls through a communication specifically intended for disabled   
                                      number or numbers in a national or         users using text relay or total conversation       
                                      international telephone numbering plan;    services through a number or numbers in a national 
                                                                                 or international telephone numbering plan;         

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  124

   Malcolm Harbour

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 2 - point (c)

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 2 - point (e)

                                                          
                                      Position commune du Amendement                                                                
                                      Conseil             
                                      point (e) shall be  point (e) shall be replaced by the following:                             
                                      deleted;            
                                                          "(e) "traffic management policies" means the procedures put in place by   
                                                          the provider of a public electronic communications service or network in  
                                                          order to measure and control traffic on a network link so as to avoid     
                                                          filling the link to capacity or overfilling the link, which might result  
                                                          in network congestion and poor performance.";                             

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  125

   Eva-Britt Svensson

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 13

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 20 - paragraph 1 - point (b)

                                                                               
                                      Position commune du Conseil              Amendement                                           
                                      (b) the services provided, including in  (b) the services provided, including in particular:  
                                      particular,                              
                                      - information on the provider's traffic  - information on the traffic management policies     
                                      management policies,                     operated by the undertaking such that the subscriber 
                                                                               is able to make an informed decision as to whether   
                                                                               to purchase the service, and/or, where necessary,    
                                                                               adjust their behaviour, deactivate the service,      
                                                                               alter the service criteria or switch networks.       
                                                                               Operators shall, where necessary, disclose specific  
                                                                               actions included in the traffic management policy,   
                                                                               - whether or not access to emergency services and    
                                                                               caller location information are being provided       
                                                                               and/or any limitations for provision of emergency    
                                                                               services under Article 26,                           
                                      - the minimum service quality levels     - the minimum service quality levels offered, namely 
                                      offered, namely the time for the initial the time for the initial connection and, where       
                                      connection and, where appropriate, other appropriate, other quality of service parameters, as 
                                      quality of service parameters, as        defined by the national regulatory authorities,      
                                      defined by the national regulatory       
                                      authorities,                             
                                      - the types of maintenance service       - the types of maintenance service offered and       
                                      offered and customer support services    customer support services provided, as well as the   
                                      provided, as well as the means of        means of contacting these services,                  
                                      contacting these services,               
                                      - any restrictions imposed by the        - any restrictions imposed by the provider on the    
                                      provider on the use of terminal          use of terminal equipment supplied;                  
                                      equipment supplied;                      

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  126

   Jacques Toubon

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 13

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 20 - paragraph 1 - point (b) - indent 1

                                                                      
                                      Position commune du Conseil     Amendement                                                    
                                      - information on the provider's - information on any relevant limitations imposed by the      
                                      traffic management policies,    undertaking, in accordance with national law, on a            
                                                                      subscriber's ability to access, use or distribute information 
                                                                      or run applications or services,                              

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

                                                                              Justification

   What is relevant for the functioning of the retail market is transparent information on the nature of the retail service in terms of restrictions of access to
   content and applications. The Council proposition to provide information about changes to the "traffic management policies" of operators is not meeting the actual
   information requirement of customers and as such is both too broad and not helpful and not relevant for end-users.

   Amendement  127

   Bernadette Vergnaud, Heide Ru:hle

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 13

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 20 - paragraph 1 - point (b)

                                                                                
                                      Position commune du Conseil               Amendement                                          
                                      (b) the services provided, including in   (b) the services provided, including in particular, 
                                      particular,                               
                                                                                - whether or not reliable and accurate access to    
                                                                                emergency services and caller location information  
                                                                                is being provided and/or any limitations for        
                                                                                provision of emergency services under Article 26    
                                                                                and/or the possible lack of access in areas not     
                                                                                covered by mobile networks,                         
                                      - information on the provider's traffic   - information on any limitations regarding access   
                                      management policies,                      to and/or use of services and applications,         
                                                                                including information on any traffic management     
                                                                                policies which are essential to prevent degradation 
                                                                                of service or slowing of traffic over networks and  
                                                                                on how these may impact on the delivery of the      
                                                                                service,                                            
                                      - the minimum service quality levels      - the minimum service quality levels offered,       
                                      offered, namely the time for the initial  namely the time for the initial connection and,     
                                      connection and, where appropriate, other  where appropriate, other quality of service         
                                      quality of service parameters, as defined parameters, as defined by the national regulatory   
                                      by the national regulatory authorities,   authorities,                                        
                                      - the types of maintenance service        - the types of maintenance service offered and      
                                      offered and customer support services     customer support services provided, as well as the  
                                      provided, as well as the means of         means of contacting these services,                 
                                      contacting these services,                
                                      - any restrictions imposed by the         - any restrictions imposed by the provider on the   
                                      provider on the use of terminal equipment use of terminal equipment supplied;                 
                                      supplied;                                 

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  128

   Malcolm Harbour

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 13

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 20 - paragraph 1 - point (b)

                                                                                     
                                      Position commune du Conseil                    Amendement                                     
                                      b) the services provided, including in         (b) the services provided, including in        
                                      particular,                                    particular                                     
                                                                                     - whether or not access to emergency services  
                                                                                     and caller location information is being       
                                                                                     provided and/or any limitations for provision  
                                                                                     of emergency services under Article 26,        
                                      - information on the provider's traffic        - information on any other limitations         
                                      management policies,                           regarding access to and/or use of services and 
                                                                                     applications, where allowed under national     
                                                                                     law,                                           
                                      - the minimum service quality levels offered,  - the minimum service quality levels offered,  
                                      namely the time for the initial connection     namely the time for the initial connection     
                                      and, where appropriate, other quality of       and, where appropriate, other quality of       
                                      service parameters, as defined by the national service parameters, as defined by the national 
                                      regulatory authorities,                        regulatory authorities,                        
                                                                                     - information on any traffic management        
                                                                                     policies and on how these may impact on        
                                                                                     service quality,                               
                                      - the types of maintenance service offered and - the types of maintenance service offered and 
                                      customer support services provided, as well as customer support services provided, as well as 
                                      the means of contacting these services,        the means of contacting these services,        
                                      - any restrictions imposed by the provider on  - any restrictions imposed by the provider on  
                                      the use of terminal equipment supplied;        the use of terminal equipment supplied;        

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  129

   Eva-Britt Svensson

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 13

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 21 - paragraph 1

                                                                                 
                                      Position commune du Conseil                Amendement                                         
                                      1. Member States shall ensure that         1. Member States shall ensure that undertakings    
                                      national regulatory authorities are able   providing connection to a public electronic        
                                      to oblige undertakings providing           communications network and/or electronic           
                                      electronic communications networks and/or  communications services publish transparent,       
                                      services to publish transparent,           comparable and up-to-date information on traffic   
                                      comparable, adequate and up-to-date        management policies, applicable prices and tariffs 
                                      information, as set out in Annex II, on    and any charges due on termination of a contract   
                                      applicable prices and tariffs and standard and information on standard terms and conditions   
                                      terms and conditions in respect of access  in respect of access to, and use of, services      
                                      to, and use of, services provided by them  provided by them to end-users and consumers in     
                                      to end-users and consumers. National       accordance with Annex II. Such information shall   
                                      regulatory authorities may specify         be published in a clear, comprehensive and easily  
                                      additional requirements regarding the form accessible form and should include when and under  
                                      in which such information is published to  what circumstances traffic management policies are 
                                      ensure transparency, comparability,        implemented, and the criteria and rules            
                                      clarity and accessibility for the benefit  implemented by the operator for managing traffic,  
                                      of consumers.                              including the thresholds that will trigger changes 
                                                                                 in the users' experience of the services. National 
                                                                                 regulatory authorities may specify additional      
                                                                                 requirements regarding the form in which such      
                                                                                 information is to be published.                    

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

                                                                              Justification

   To clarify the concept of transparency and establish a common understanding of  what it might mean in the context of the new telecommunications environment and the
   implementation by network operators of `traffic management systems' as defined in Recital 22a (new).

   Amendement  130

   Malcolm Harbour

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 13

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 21 - paragraph 3

                                                                                     
                                      Position commune du Conseil                    Amendement                                     
                                      3. Member States shall ensure that national    3. Member States shall ensure that national    
                                      regulatory authorities are able to oblige      regulatory authorities are able to oblige      
                                      undertakings providing electronic              undertakings providing connection to a public  
                                      communications services to inter alia:         electronic communications network and/or       
                                                                                     electronic communications services to inter    
                                                                                     alia:                                          
                                      (a) provide applicable tariff information to   (a) provide applicable tariff information to   
                                      subscribers regarding any number or service    subscribers regarding any number or service    
                                      subject to particular pricing conditions; with subject to particular pricing conditions; with 
                                      respect to individual categories of services,  respect to individual categories of services,  
                                      national regulatory authorities may require    national regulatory authorities may require    
                                      such information to be provided immediately    such information to be provided immediately    
                                      prior to connecting the call;                  prior to connecting the call;                  
                                                                                     (aa) regularly remind subscribers of any lack  
                                                                                     of reliable access to emergency services or    
                                                                                     caller location information in the service     
                                                                                     they have subscribed to;                       
                                      (b) inform subscribers of any change to the    (b)  inform subscribers of any change to       
                                      provider's traffic management policies;        limitations regarding access to and/or use of  
                                                                                     services and applications, where allowed under 
                                                                                     national law;                                  
                                                                                     (ba) provide information on any traffic        
                                                                                     management policies and on how these may       
                                                                                     impact on service quality;                     
                                      (c) inform subscribers of their right to       (c) inform subscribers of their right to       
                                      determine whether or not to include their      determine whether or not to include their      
                                      personal data in a directory, and of the types personal data in a directory, and of the types 
                                      of data concerned, in accordance with Article  of data concerned, in accordance with Article  
                                      12 of Directive 2002/58/EC (Directive on       12 of Directive 2002/58/EC (Directive on       
                                      privacy and electronic communications); and    privacy and electronic communications); and    
                                      (d) regularly inform disabled subscribers of   (d) regularly inform disabled subscribers of   
                                      details of products and services designed for  details of products and services designed for  
                                      them.                                          them.                                          
                                      If deemed appropriate, national regulatory     If deemed appropriate, national regulatory     
                                      authorities may promote self- or co-regulatory authorities may promote self- or co-regulatory 
                                      measures prior to imposing any obligation.     measures prior to imposing any obligation.     

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  131

   Eva-Britt Svensson

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 13

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 21 - paragraph 3

                                                                                    
                                      Position commune du Conseil                   Amendement                                      
                                      3. Member States shall ensure that national   3. Member States shall ensure that national     
                                      regulatory authorities are able to oblige     regulatory authorities are able to oblige       
                                      undertakings providing electronic             undertakings providing connection to a public   
                                      communications services to inter alia:        electronic communications network and/or        
                                                                                    electronic communications services to inter     
                                                                                    alia:                                           
                                      (a) provide applicable tariff information to  (a) provide applicable tariff information to    
                                      subscribers regarding any number or service   subscribers regarding any number or service     
                                      subject to particular pricing conditions;     subject to particular pricing conditions; with  
                                      with respect to individual categories of      respect to individual categories of services,   
                                      services, national regulatory authorities may national regulatory authorities may require     
                                      require such information to be provided       such information to be provided immediately     
                                      immediately prior to connecting the call;     prior to connecting the call;                   
                                      (b) inform subscribers of any change to the   (b)  inform subscribers of the provider's       
                                      provider's traffic management policies;       traffic management policies, and any change     
                                                                                    thereto, so that subscribers are able to make   
                                                                                    an informed decision as to whether to to        
                                                                                    purchase the service, and/or, where necessary,  
                                                                                    adjust their behaviour, deactivate the service, 
                                                                                    alter the service criteria or switch networks.  
                                                                                    Operators shall, where necessary, disclose      
                                                                                    specific actions included in the traffic        
                                                                                    management policy;                              
                                                                                    (ba) regularly remind subscribers of any lack   
                                                                                    of reliable access to emergency services or     
                                                                                    caller location information in the service to   
                                                                                    which they have subscribed;                     
                                      (c) inform subscribers of their right to      (c) inform subscribers of their right to        
                                      determine whether or not to include their     determine whether or not to include their       
                                      personal data in a directory, and of the      personal data in a directory, and of the types  
                                      types of data concerned, in accordance with   of data concerned, in accordance with Article   
                                      Article 12 of Directive 2002/58/EC (Directive 12 of Directive 2002/58/EC (Directive on        
                                      on privacy and electronic communications);    privacy and electronic communications); and     
                                      and                                           
                                      (d) regularly inform disabled subscribers of  (d) regularly inform disabled subscribers of    
                                      details of products and services designed for details of products and services designed for   
                                      them.                                         them.                                           
                                      If deemed appropriate, national regulatory    If deemed appropriate, national regulatory      
                                      authorities may promote self- or              authorities may promote self- or co-regulatory  
                                      co-regulatory measures prior to imposing any  measures prior to imposing any obligation.      
                                      obligation.                                   

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

                                                                              Justification

   Telecommunications  framework law concerns the regulation of network operators and providers of electronic communications services, and not the regulationof user
   behaviour. This directive concerns the rights of users and citizens in respect of the purchase of services from such operators.  The regulators task is to ensure
   the accountability of the operators.

   Amendement  132

   Jacques Toubon

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 13

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 21 - paragraph 3

                                                                                     
                                      Position commune du Conseil                    Amendement                                     
                                      3. Member States shall ensure that national    3. Member States shall ensure that national    
                                      regulatory authorities are able to oblige      regulatory authorities are able to oblige      
                                      undertakings providing electronic              undertakings providing connection to a public  
                                      communications services to inter alia:         electronic communications network and/or       
                                                                                     electronic communications services to inter    
                                                                                     alia:                                          
                                      (a) provide applicable tariff information to   (a) provide applicable tariff information to   
                                      subscribers regarding any number or service    subscribers regarding any number or service    
                                      subject to particular pricing conditions; with subject to particular pricing conditions; with 
                                      respect to individual categories of services,  respect to individual categories of services,  
                                      national regulatory authorities may require    national regulatory authorities may require    
                                      such information to be provided immediately    such information to be provided immediately    
                                      prior to connecting the call;                  prior to connecting the call;                  
                                      (b) inform subscribers of any change to the    (b) inform subscribers of any change to any    
                                      provider's traffic management policies;        relevant limitations imposed by the            
                                                                                     undertaking, in accordance with national law,  
                                                                                     on a subscriber's ability to access, use or    
                                                                                     distribute information or run applications or  
                                                                                     services;                                      
                                      (c) inform subscribers of their right to       (c) inform subscribers of their right to       
                                      determine whether or not to include their      determine whether or not to include their      
                                      personal data in a directory, and of the types personal data in a directory, and of the types 
                                      of data concerned, in accordance with Article  of data concerned, in accordance with Article  
                                      12 of Directive 2002/58/EC (Directive on       12 of Directive 2002/58/EC (Directive on       
                                      privacy and electronic communications); and    privacy and electronic communications); and    
                                      (d) regularly inform disabled subscribers of   (d) regularly inform disabled subscribers of   
                                      details of products and services designed for  details of products and services designed for  
                                      them.                                          them.                                          
                                      If deemed appropriate, national regulatory     If deemed appropriate, national regulatory     
                                      authorities may promote self- or co-regulatory authorities may promote self- or co-regulatory 
                                      measures prior to imposing any obligation.     measures prior to imposing any obligation.     

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

                                                                              Justification

   What is relevant for the functioning of the retail market is transparent information on the nature of the retail service in terms of restrictions of access to
   content and applications. The Council proposition to provide information about changes to the "traffic management policies" of operators is not meeting the actual
   information requirement of customers and as such is both too broad and not helpful and not relevant for end-users.

   Amendement  133

   Bernadette Vergnaud, Cristian Silviu Busoi, Heide Ru:hle

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 13

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 21 - paragraph 3

                                                                                       
                                      Position commune du Conseil                      Amendement                                   
                                      3. Member States shall ensure that national      3. Member States shall ensure that national  
                                      regulatory authorities are able to oblige        regulatory authorities are able to oblige    
                                      undertakings providing electronic communications undertakings providing connection to a       
                                      services to inter alia:                          public electronic communications network     
                                                                                       and/or electronic communications services to 
                                                                                       inter alia:                                  
                                      (a) provide applicable tariff information to     (a) provide applicable tariff information to 
                                      subscribers regarding any number or service      subscribers regarding any number or service  
                                      subject to particular pricing conditions; with   subject to particular pricing conditions;    
                                      respect to individual categories of services,    with respect to individual categories of     
                                      national regulatory authorities may require such services, national regulatory authorities    
                                      information to be provided immediately prior to  may require such information to be provided  
                                      connecting the call;                             immediately prior to connecting the call;    
                                                                                       (aa) regularly remind subscribers of any     
                                                                                       lack of reliable access to emergency         
                                                                                       services or caller location information in   
                                                                                       the service to which they have subscribed;   
                                      (b) inform subscribers of any change to the      (b) inform subscribers of any relevant       
                                      provider's traffic management policies;          change to the provider's traffic management  
                                                                                       policies and subsequent possible limitations 
                                                                                       of access to applications or services;       
                                      (c) inform subscribers of their right to         (c) inform subscribers of their right to     
                                      determine whether or not to include their        determine whether or not to include their    
                                      personal data in a directory, and of the types   personal data in a directory, and of the     
                                      of data concerned, in accordance with Article 12 types of data concerned, in accordance with  
                                      of Directive 2002/58/EC (Directive on privacy    Article 12 of Directive 2002/58/EC           
                                      and electronic communications); and              (Directive on privacy and electronic         
                                                                                       communications); and                         
                                      (d) regularly inform disabled subscribers of     (d) regularly inform disabled subscribers of 
                                      details of products and services designed for    details of products and services designed    
                                      them.                                            for them.                                    
                                      If deemed appropriate, national regulatory       If deemed appropriate, national regulatory   
                                      authorities may promote self- or co-regulatory   authorities may promote self  or co          
                                      measures prior to imposing any obligation.       regulatory measures prior to imposing any    
                                                                                       obligation.                                  

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  134

   Malcolm Harbour

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 13

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 21 - paragraph 4 - introductory wording

                                                                                 
                                      Position commune du Conseil                Amendement                                         
                                      4. Member States may require that          4. Member States may require that undertakings     
                                      undertakings referred to in paragraph 3    referred to in paragraph 3 distribute public       
                                      distribute public interest information     interest information to existing and new           
                                      free of charge to existing and new         subscribers, where appropriate, through the same   
                                      subscribers, where appropriate. In such a  means as those ordinarily used by the undertakings 
                                      case, that information shall be provided   for their communications with subscribers and free 
                                      by the relevant public authorities in a    of charge. In such a case, that information shall  
                                      standardised format and shall, inter alia, be provided by the relevant public authorities in  
                                      cover the following topics:                a standardised format and shall, inter alia, cover 
                                                                                 the following topics:                              

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  135

   Eva-Britt Svensson

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 13

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 22 - paragraph 1

                                                                             
                                      Position commune du Conseil            Amendement                                             
                                      1. Member States shall ensure that     1. Member States shall ensure that national regulatory 
                                      national regulatory authorities are,   authorities are, after taking account of the views of  
                                      after taking account of the views of   interested parties, able to require undertakings that  
                                      interested parties, able to require    provide publicly available electronic communications   
                                      undertakings that provide publicly     networks and/or services to publish equivalent,        
                                      available electronic communications    adequate and up-todate information for end-users on    
                                      networks and/or services to publish    the quality of their services and measures taken to    
                                      comparable, adequate and up-to-date    ensure comparable access for disabled end-users and to 
                                      information for end-users on the       disclose traffic management policies. That information 
                                      quality of their services and measures shall, on request, be supplied to the national         
                                      taken to ensure comparable access for  regulatory authority in advance of its publication.    
                                      disabled end-users. That information   Member States shall ensure that national regulatory    
                                      shall, on request, be supplied to the  authorities are able to take appropriate measures in   
                                      national regulatory authority in       cases where operators fail to disclose their traffic   
                                      advance of its publication.            management policies or where the traffic management    
                                                                             policy does not respect the rights of users to access  
                                                                             the content, applications and services of their        
                                                                             choice. National regulatory authorities shall          
                                                                             additionally ensure that there is a facility in place  
                                                                             by which users can monitor and identify any problems   
                                                                             created by traffic management policies in cases where  
                                                                             disputes may arise.                                    

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

                                                                              Justification

   The Electronic Communications Framework requires safeguards to be in place to ensure that users can freely access and use the content, services and applications of
   their choice, at the same time as allowing operators the necessary flexibility to address congestion during peak periods through network management practices that
   are non-discriminatory. Regulators should be able to look at whether traffic management policies are intended to support a commercial interest, in order to assess
   whether abusive behaviour is taking place, and take appropriate action.

   Amendement  136

   Erika Mann, Edit Herczog

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 13

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 22 - paragraph 3

                                                                                       
                                      Position commune du Conseil                      Amendement                                   
                                      3. In order to prevent the degradation of        3. In order to address unjustified           
                                      service and the hindering or slowing down of     degradation of service and hindering or      
                                      traffic over networks, Member States shall       slowing of traffic over networks, Member     
                                      ensure that national regulatory authorities are  States shall ensure that national regulatory 
                                      able to set minimum quality of service           authorities are able to set minimum quality  
                                      requirements on an undertaking or undertakings   of service requirements on an undertaking or 
                                      providing public communications networks.        undertakings providing public communications 
                                                                                       networks.                                    

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

                                                                              Justification

   The current EU legal framework and the new rules on transparency proposed in this Directive in principle already provide for sufficient safeguards to ensure the
   ability of end-users to access content and applications of their choice. In particular, a competitive market for retail broadband access - where necessary ensured
   by wholesale ex-ante access obligations under Directive 2002/19/EC - and transparency requirements regarding restrictions of quality of service under this
   Directive will penalise any undue restrictions of users' ability to access the content of their choice. If NRAs are nevertheless given the power to intervene in
   QoS, it should be clarified that this can be done only to address observed harmful practices that are not justified by legitimate interests of network management.

   Amendement  137

   Zita Plestinska, Andreas Schwab

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 13

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 22 - paragraph 3

                                                                                       
                                      Position commune du Conseil                      Amendement                                   
                                      3. In order to prevent the degradation of        3. In order to address  unjustified          
                                      service and the hindering or slowing down of     degradation of service and hindering or      
                                      traffic over networks, Member States shall       slowing of traffic over networks, Member     
                                      ensure that national regulatory authorities are  States shall ensure that national regulatory 
                                      able to set minimum quality of service           authorities are able to set minimum quality  
                                      requirements on an undertaking or undertakings   of service requirements on an undertaking or 
                                      providing public communications networks.        undertakings providing public communications 
                                                                                       networks.                                    

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

                                                                              Justification

   The current EU legal framework and the new rules on transparency proposed in this Directive in principle already provide for sufficient safeguards to ensure the
   ability of end-users to access content and applications of their choice in a competitive market for retail broadband access services. The amendment clarifies that
   if NRAs are given the power to intervene in quality of service, they should only address actual harmful practices that are not justified by legitimate interests of
   network management to not unduly limit innovation in the network.

   Amendement  138

   Syed Kamall

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 13

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 22 - paragraph 3

                                                                                       
                                      Position commune du Conseil                      Amendement                                   
                                      3. In order to prevent the degradation of        3. In order to address unjustified           
                                      service and the hindering or slowing down of     degradation of service and hindering or      
                                      traffic over networks, Member States shall       slowing of traffic over networks, Member     
                                      ensure that national regulatory authorities are  States shall ensure that national regulatory 
                                      able to set minimum quality of service           authorities are able to set minimum quality  
                                      requirements on an undertaking or undertakings   of service requirements on an undertaking or 
                                      providing public communications networks.        undertakings providing public communications 
                                                                                       networks.                                    

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

                                                                              Justification

   The current EU legal framework and the new rules on transparency proposed in this Directive in principle already provide for sufficient safeguards to ensure the
   ability of end-users to access content and applications of their choice. In particular, a competitive market for retail broadband access - where necessary ensured
   by wholesale ex-ante access obligations under Directive 2002/19/EC - and transparency requirements regarding restrictions of quality of service under this
   Directive will penalise any undue restrictions of users' ability to access the content of their choice. If NRAs are nevertheless given the power to intervene in
   QoS, it should be clarified that this can be done only to address observed harmful practices that are not justified by legitimate interests of network management.

   Amendement  139

   Bernadette Vergnaud, Cristian Silviu Busoi, Heide Ru:hle

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 13

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 22 - paragraph 3 a (new)

                                                          
                                      Position commune du Amendement                                                                
                                      Conseil             
                                                          3a. To ensure quality of services, operators may use traffic management   
                                                          policies, namely the procedures put in place by the provider in order to  
                                                          measure and control traffic on a network link so as to avoid filling the  
                                                          link to capacity or overfilling the link, which would result in network   
                                                          congestion and poor performance.                                          

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  140

   Cristian Silviu Busoi

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 13

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 22 - paragraph 3 b (new)

                                                                  
                                      Position commune du Conseil Amendement                                                        
                                                                  3b. These policies are deemed appropriate and reasonable as long  
                                                                  as it can be proved that they are not anti-competitive and do not 
                                                                  hinder the competitive development of the information society.    

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

                                                                              Justification

   This addition to the article brings some clarifications on what type of procedures are to be considered as appropriate traffic management policies. It provides an
   important safeguard that traffic management policies are not underpinned by hidden commercial purposes of the network operators and do not constitute
   anti-competitive behaviour. This way, the development of the information society in a competitive environment is encouraged.

   Amendement  141

   Bernadette Vergnaud, Heide Ru:hle

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 13

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 22 - paragraph 3 b (new)

                                                          
                                      Position commune du Amendement                                                                
                                      Conseil             
                                                          3b. Traffic management policies are deemed appropriate and reasonable as  
                                                          long as it can be proved that they are not anti-competitive or do not     
                                                          give preferential treatment to the services or applications of the        
                                                          network operators or their commercial partners over the services and      
                                                          applications of other providers.                                          

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  142

   Heide Ru:hle

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 13

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 22 - paragraph 3 c (new)

                                                          
                                      Position commune du Amendement                                                                
                                      Conseil             
                                                          3c. The minimum quality of services requirements may oblige operators to  
                                                          use traffic management policies, namely the procedures put in place by    
                                                          the provider in order to measure and control traffic on a network link so 
                                                          as to avoid filling the link to capacity or overfilling the link, which   
                                                          would result in network congestion and poor performance.                  

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  143

   Bernadette Vergnaud

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 15 - point c

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 25 - paragraph 3

                                                                                             
                                      Position commune du Conseil                            Amendement                             
                                      3. Member States shall ensure that all end-users       3. Member States shall ensure that all 
                                      provided with a publicly available telephone service   end-users provided with a publicly     
                                      can access directory enquiry services. National        available telephone service can access 
                                      regulatory authorities shall be able to impose         directory enquiry services and that    
                                      obligations and conditions on undertakings that        operators controlling access to such   
                                      control access of end-users for the provision of       services provide it on terms which are 
                                      directory enquiry services in accordance with the      fair, reasonable, objective,           
                                      provisions of Article 5 of Directive 2002/19/EC        non-discriminatory and transparent.    
                                      (Access Directive). Such obligations and conditions    
                                      shall be objective, proportionate, non-discriminatory  
                                      and transparent.                                       

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  144

   Bernadette Vergnaud, Cristian Silviu Busoi, Heide Ru:hle

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 16

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 26 - paragraph 5

                                                                                            
                                      Position commune du Conseil                           Amendement                              
                                      5. Member States shall ensure that, to the extent     5. Member States shall ensure that      
                                      technically feasible, undertakings concerned make     undertakings concerned make caller      
                                      caller location information available free of charge  location information available free of  
                                      to the authority handling emergency calls as soon as  charge to the authority handling        
                                      the call reaches that authority. This applies to all  emergency calls as soon as the call     
                                      calls to the single European emergency call number    reaches that authority. This applies to 
                                      "112". Member States may extend this obligation to    all calls to the single European        
                                      cover calls to national emergency numbers. Where      emergency call number "112". Member     
                                      undertakings referred to in paragraph 2 wish to claim States may extend this obligation to    
                                      that providing caller location information is not     cover calls to national emergency       
                                      technically feasible, they shall bear the burden of   numbers.                                
                                      proving this.                                         

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  145

   Bernadette Vergnaud, Heide Ru:hle

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 21

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 31 - paragraph 1 - subparagraph 1

                                                                                       
                                      Position commune du Conseil                      Amendement                                   
                                      1.Member States may impose reasonable "must      1. Member States may impose reasonable "must 
                                      carry" obligations, for the transmission of      carry" obligations, for the transmission of  
                                      specified radio and television broadcast         specified radio and audiovisual media        
                                      channels and complementary services,             services and  complementary services,        
                                      particularly accessibility services to enable    particularly accessibility services, on      
                                      appropriate access for disabled end-users, on    undertakings under their jurisdiction        
                                      undertakings under their jurisdiction providing  providing electronic communications networks 
                                      electronic communications networks used for the  used for the distribution of radio or        
                                      distribution of radio or television broadcast    audiovisual media services to the public     
                                      channels to the public where a significant       where a significant number of end-users of   
                                      number of end-users of such networks use them as such networks use them as their principal    
                                      their principal means to receive radio and       means to receive radio and audiovisual media 
                                      television broadcast channels. Such obligations  services. Such obligations shall only be     
                                      shall only be imposed where they are necessary   imposed where they are necessary to meet     
                                      to meet general interest objectives as clearly   general interest objectives as clearly and   
                                      defined by each Member State and shall be        specifically defined by each Member State    
                                      proportionate and transparent.                   and shall be proportionate and transparent.  

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  146

   Heide Ru:hle

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 21 a (new)

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 32 a (new)

                                                          
                                      Position commune du Amendement                                                                
                                      Conseil             
                                                          (21a) the following Article shall be inserted:                            
                                                          "Article 32a                                                              
                                                          Access to content, services and applications                              
                                                          Member States shall ensure that any restrictions to users' rights to      
                                                          access content, services and applications, if they are necessary, shall   
                                                          be implemented by appropriate measures, in accordance with the principles 
                                                          of proportionality, effectiveness and dissuasiveness. These measures      
                                                          shall not have the  effect of hindering the development of the            
                                                          information society, in compliance with Directive 2000/31/EC, and shall   
                                                          not conflict with citizens' fundamental rights, including the right to    
                                                          privacy and the right to due process."                                    

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

                                                                              Justification

   Takes up Parliament's 1st reading; promotes fundamental principles and rights which should also be respected when it comes to electronic communications.

   Amendement  147

   Jacques Toubon

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 21 a (new)

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 32 a (new)

                                                          
                                      Position commune du Amendement                                                                
                                      Conseil             
                                                          (21a) the following Article shall be inserted:                            
                                                          "Article 32a                                                              
                                                          Member States shall ensure that any restrictions on the rights of users   
                                                          to access content, services and applications, if such restrictions are    
                                                          necessary, are implemented by appropriate measures, in accordance with    
                                                          the principles of proportionality, effectiveness and dissuasiveness. The  
                                                          measures shall be aimed at enhancing the development of the information   
                                                          society, in compliance with the EC legal order, and shall fully respect   
                                                          the fundamental rights protected by the Community legal order, including  
                                                          the right to privacy, the right to property, the right to due process and 
                                                          the right to an effective remedy."                                        

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  148

   Eva-Britt Svensson

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 1 - point 22 - point b

   Directive 2002/22/EC

   Article 33 - paragraph 3

                                                                                       
                                      Position commune du Conseil                      Amendement                                   
                                      3. Without prejudice to national rules in        3. Without prejudice to national rules in    
                                      conformity with Community law promoting cultural conformity with Community law promoting      
                                      and media policy objectives, such as cultural    cultural and media policy objectives, such   
                                      and linguistic diversity and media pluralism,    as cultural and linguistic diversity and     
                                      national regulatory authorities and other        media pluralism, national regulatory         
                                      relevant authorities may promote cooperation     authorities and other relevant authorities   
                                      between undertakings providing electronic        may promote cooperation between undertakings 
                                      communications networks and/or services and      providing electronic communications networks 
                                      sectors interested in the promotion of lawful    and/or services and sectors interested in    
                                      content in electronic communication networks and the promotion of  content in electronic      
                                      services. That cooperation may also include      communication networks and services. That    
                                      coordination of the public interest information  cooperation may also include coordination of 
                                      to be provided pursuant to Article 21(4)(a) and  the public interest information to be        
                                      Article 20(1).                                   provided pursuant to Article 21(4)(a) and    
                                                                                       Article 20(1).                               

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

                                                                              Justification

   The term "lawful content" implies a judgement whether copyright is breached or not. Such judgement lies outside the scope of the telecoms regulation since it is
   not about copyright enforcement at all. "Promotion of content" on the other hand is a generic term which allows libraries, user generated content advocates, civil
   society and traditional copyright holders to find common interests in the development of the information society in the cooperation envisaged in this amendment.

   Amendement  149

   Malcolm Harbour

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 2 - point 4 - point b

   Directive 2002/58/EC

   Article 4 - paragraph 4

                                                                               
                                      Position commune du Conseil              Amendement                                           
                                      4. Member States shall ensure that the   4. Subject to any technical implementing measures    
                                      competent national authority is able to  adopted under paragraph 4, the  competent national   
                                      set detailed rules and, where necessary, authorities may adopt guidelines and,  where         
                                      issue instructions concerning the        necessary, issue instructions concerning the         
                                      circumstances in which notification of   circumstances in which  notification by providers of 
                                      personal data breaches by providers of a personal data breaches is required and the format of 
                                      publicly available electronic            and procedures for such notification. They shall     
                                      communications service is necessary, the also monitor whether providers have complied with    
                                      format applicable to such notification   their notification obligations under this paragraph  
                                      and the manner in which the notification and impose appropriate sanctions in the event of a   
                                      is to be made.                           failure to do so.                                    
                                                                               Providers shall maintain an inventory of personal    
                                                                               data breaches, comprising the facts surrounding such 
                                                                               breaches, their effects and the remedial action      
                                                                               taken, sufficient for the purpose of enabling the    
                                                                               competent national authorities to verify compliance  
                                                                               with the provisions of paragraph 3. The inventory    
                                                                               shall only include the information necessary for     
                                                                               this purpose.                                        

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  150

   Eva-Britt Svensson

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 2 - point 6 - point c

   Directive 2002/58/EC

   Article 6 - paragraph 7

                                                                                
                                      Position commune du Conseil               Amendement                                          
                                      7. Traffic data may be processed to the   7. Traffic data  may  be collected, stored and used 
                                      extent strictly necessary to ensure       in specific cases to the  extent strictly necessary 
                                      network and information security, as      to ensure network and information security, as      
                                      defined by Article 4(c) of                defined by Article 4(c) of Regulation (EC) No       
                                      Regulation (EC) No 460/2004 of the        460/2004 of the European Parliament and of the      
                                      European Parliament and of the Council of Council of 10 March 2004 establishing the European  
                                      10 March 2004 establishing the European   Network and Information Security Agency. Traffic    
                                      Network and Information Security Agency.  data stored pursuant to this paragraph must not be  
                                                                                used for any other purpose and must be erased or    
                                                                                made anonymous no later than seven days after its   
                                                                                collection.                                         

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

                                                                              Justification

   The term "processing" covers "disclosure by transmission, dissemination and otherwise making available" of traffic data (see article 2(b) of Directive 95/46/EC)
   and is too broad to meet the requirements of precision of law necessary to uphold the right to privacy (ART 8 ECHR) and the principle of proportionality. This
   amendment is following recommendations of the European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS).

   Amendement  151

   Malcolm Harbour

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Article 2 - point 7 a (new)

   Directive 2002/58/EC

   Article 15 - paragraph 1 b (new)

                                                          
                                      Position commune du Amendement                                                                
                                      Conseil             
                                                          (7a) in Article 15, the following paragraph shall be inserted:            
                                                          "1b. Providers shall establish internal procedures for responding to      
                                                          requests for access to users' personal data based on national provisions  
                                                          adopted pursuant to paragraph 1. They shall provide the competent         
                                                          national authority, on demand, with information on those procedures, the  
                                                          number of requests received, the legal justification invoked and the      
                                                          response by the provider."                                                

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en

   Amendement  152

   Malcolm Harbour

   Position commune du Conseil - acte modificatif

   Annex I - Part A - point e b (new)

                                                          
                                      Position commune du Amendement                                                                
                                      Conseil             
                                                          (eb) Best advice                                                          
                                                          i.e. the facility whereby an undertaking at least once a year clearly     
                                                          communicates to subscribers who have requested the facility and consented 
                                                          to the undertaking retaining the data necessary to provide it,            
                                                          alternative lower-cost tariffs, if available, on the basis of usage       
                                                          patterns for the previous twelve months.                                  

                                                                                                                                                                Or. en
